Still a big tradition
 Christmas cards are a big tradition in the English-speaking world. In 2017, people in Britain sent and received about 900 million cards. That's an average of about twelve cards for every person, from tiny babies to the oldest grandparents.
   The number of cards that are sent around Britain causes an annual headache for the postal service. Each year, the postal service has to take on seasonal staff to help with the extra mail, and postal sorting offices are stretched to their maximum capacity and sometimes beyond it.
  Clear, simple,  and the only English grammar book you'll ever need  In 1994, before the age of email and social media, the service handled about 1.6 billion cards! – about 25 cards per person in Great Britain, including children!)  In spite of advertisements telling people to "Post Early for Christmas", few people get round to sending off their cards before December 10th; and from that point on, the postal service slows down.
    Until the age of faxes, emails and social media, the pre-Christmas period often caused a lot of problems for firms and industry, as "urgent" letters and documents took several days to reach their destination by post, slowed down by the mass of Christmas mail!

    During the month of December in Britain, a house with no Christmas cards is like a pub with no beer; it just does not exist  except possibly at the home of a few radical non-Christians. For the most part, however, people of all faiths and of no faith join in the tradition of celebrating Christmas as a festival, whether they do so for religious reasons or not.
    Christmas cards are an important part of the celebrations, and virtually any British home one goes into around Christmas time is merrily decorated not just with holly and mistletoe and paper decorations, but also with a display of Christmas cards, received from friends, family, neighbours, employers and a variety of other people.
    In some places, the number of Christmas cards people receive is seen as a measure of their status among their friends and neighbours.
    "Look at them, Cynthia dear," says Norma Jones, showing her cards to her neighbour who's just come round for a chat. "How many have you got so far? We've got a hundred and three already."
    "Oh my darling," replies Cynthia, "Is that all? We've got over a hundred and fifty! There's not much room left in the lounge to put them all up.... And you know, I was at Margaret's this morning, and they've hardly got any! They can't have many friends, can they?"

    The first cards are usually put up on the mantelpiece above the fire in the lounge; then as more come in, any available flat surface is put to use: bookshelves, the top of the T.V., window-sills, the top of any cupboard.
    In some houses, cards are hung on ribbons on the wall, either vertically or in long arcs across the wall.
    If the living room fills up, more cards are hung or placed in other rooms and in the hall. By Christmas time, the main rooms in almost any house are gaily festooned with cards of all shapes and sizes.

    While cheap Christmas cards can be bought from any supermarket, cards have recently become a major source of income for all sorts of charities. Many people like to feel that they are doing something good by buying Christmas cards, and charities like Oxfam*, W.W.F., Cancer Research and Greenpeace (to name but a few) now sell millions of cards each Christmas.
    As for the subjects of Christmas cards, the range, today, is enormous. At one time, two principal themes predominated : the Christmas story, with pictures of the nativity and biblical scenes; and "traditional Christmas", with imaginary scenes of Christmas as it might have been in the past (but rarely was!), with lots of clean snow on the ground, burning wood fires, horses and carriages and well-fed happy-looking people. Today, while the traditional themes are still popular, there is no limit to the variety of pictures on cards.

    The tradition of Christmas cards began in Britain in 1843, just after the introduction of the first national postal service, the "penny post", which started in 1840. Today, almost 200 years later, Christmas cards– sometimes known as New Year cards – are a tradition all over the world, and not only in Christian countries.
  And while more and more people send e-cards and Christmas selfies to their friends and family... and even to all their "friends" on Facebook, virtual cards are not the same as old-fashioned traditional Christmas cards. You can't hang an e-card on the wall, and you can't decorate a room with rows of e-cards. Thanks to phones and tablets, we can do lots of things better than we could do them before. But sending and receiving Christmas cards is still best done by "snail mail", using a real card and a real envelope. It's much more fun. The biggest festival in the year
        Christmas is normally the biggest festival in the English year. Once the festival lasted two days, today it seems to last almost two months. Christmas Day, December 25th, is  the day when most people in Britain sit down to a special meal of roast turkey and Christmas pudding, and many people eat too much ! But Christmas Day is just the high point of the "Christmas period".
    In the weeks before Christmas, life is very busy. There are parties; there are trips to the cinema or the pantomime; and of course there's all the shopping.
    This year however there will be less Christmas shopping for many people. Charities and food-banks will be working hard to offer a "happy Christmas" to the millions of people in Britain who are finding it hard to make ends meet.

    On Christmas day, Britain closes! For most people, Christmas is a time to relax  at last  after many long and busy weeks. The presents have been bought and sent, dozens of cards have been sent and received, the food is waiting to be eaten. For two days at least (if not three or four, depending on the year), the shops will be shut, and the postman will not deliver any letters. For a day or two, even the trains stop running.

    Nowadays, Britain's Christmas shopping season lasts almost four months! The first  Christmas catalogues come through letter-boxes at the start of September!
    Lots of busy people like shopping online, because it is easier. All they have to do is choose from the pages of a colourful catalogue, or shop on the Internet. A few days later, goods are delivered to the door..... or at least one hopes they are. Some Internet shops work 24/24 in the weeks before Christmas, to make sure that everyone gets their presents on time.
    Many Christmas catalogues come from charities. Each charity has its own specialities – nature and animals from WWF, the RSPCA and others; "green" products from Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth; and hand-made articles from developing countries from charities like Oxfam and Save the Children. Big charities like these earn a lot of money from their Christmas catalogues.
Christmas shopping
Christmas shopping    In the streets, Christmas arrives at the start of November. Santa Claus and Christmas decorations start appearing in shop windows soon after "Guy Fawkes Night" (5th November). There are no other festivities between Guy Fawkes Night and Christmas.
    In the streets, vendors sell Father Christmas hats, and reindeer horns! Many shops need extra staff; some shops sell as much in November and December as they do in the other 10 months of the year. Most shops stay open later in the evening, and on Sundays too.
    During December, sometimes even earlier, the Christmas lights come on in the streets, and the big shops put on special "Christmas windows", to bring in the shoppers. This year there will be less lights, because the cost of electricity has gone up. As Christmas gets closer, the shops become more and more crowded. Nowadays, a few big shops start their "New Year Sales" before Christmas; some people therefore wait till the last days, in order to pay less for their presents.

    When the shops finally close for the holiday, most people are happy that the shopping is over. For a day at least, everything is shut... except pubs and restaurants, which do a lot of business on Christmas day. In the past, most people used to go to church on Christmas morning; today some people go to church for a special Christmas service, but most stay at home to open presents and prepare the Christmas lunch.
    In the afternoon, it's time for more presents, or to watch a good film, or go our for a walk in the country, or in the park.
    Then, after Christmas, the shopping season starts again, as people spend their Christmas money and look for bargains in the New Year sales.
    Most people have a week's holiday between Christmas and the New Year. Some, of course, have to keep working; but for most, the last week of the year is a time to relax, enjoy more parties, and do a bit more shopping.Long before the Big Mac was invented, Britain had its own national form of fast food.

"When I was a young man, it was the sort of thing you'd have once or twice a week," remembers 82-year old Arthur Mowbrey. "Sixty years ago, you'd get a full size portion of cod and chips for sixpence. It was cheap, and good."

Fish 'n' chips was nourishing too. It was a proper meal, that you could eat in the street on your way home from work, or during the lunch-break. Wrapped in newspaper, it would keep warm to the last chip, even on the coldest days of the year.

In the last quarter of a century, things have changed.

"It's not so popular with young people these days," says Lizzie, a teenager. "Most of the time, if young people want to eat out, they'll go for a hamburger or something like that, or a Chinese take-away. Fish 'n' chips is a bit old-fashioned really, I suppose. But there are still cheap chip shops around. I had fish 'n' chips about three weeks ago. We sometimes have it at home, and we go and get it from the chip shop. It saves cooking!"

Thousands of chip shops, however, have closed in the last twenty-five years. Some have been turned into Chinese or Indian take-aways, others have just closed. They have survived best in seaside towns, where the fish is really fresh, and people visit them more as a tradition than for any other reason.

Yet nothing, perhaps, can save the classic fish 'n' chip shop from extinction. Fish 'n' chips wrapped in newspaper is already just a memory of the past. British and European hygiene rules no longer allow food to be wrapped in old papers, so today's carry-out chip shops use new paper or styrofoam cartons. Of course, you can still eat fish and chips with your fingers if you want, but there are now plastic throw-away forks for those who don't want to get greasy fingers!

Yet in spite of these changes, the classic fish 'n' chip shop could disappear from British streets in a few years' time, for a completely different reason; lack of fish.

For over twenty years, European agriculture ministers have been trying to solve the fish problem, but with little success. As a result of modern industrial fishing, some types of fish are facing extinction in the North Sea and Atlantic. "Overfishing in the North Sea has reached crisis levels," say Greenpeace. Quotas have been introduced, but each time there are new restrictions, fishermen in Britain, France, Spain and other countries protest, because jobs are lost.

Sadly, this is inevitable; and unless strict quotas are applied, thousands of European fishermen could lose their jobs, as there will be few fish left to catch (at least, few of the kinds of fish that people want to eat). One way or the other, sea fish will become rarer, and therefore more expensive.

The gradual disappearance of the traditional British fish 'n' chips shop is therefore bound to continue. Fish and chips, however, will survive as a speciality in pubs and restaurants, and in new up-market fish restaurants. Comfortable, more expensive fish restaurants, with chairs and tables, have existed for a long time of course, alongside stand-up carry-out fish 'n' chip shops. In the years to come, they may be the only type of fish 'n' chip restaurant to survive.

Every town in Britain had its fish 'n' chip shops. No British town is more than 150 km. from a sea port, and most are much closer; once railways were built in the nineteenth century, fresh sea fish could easily be bought in all British towns. Cheaper than meat, sea fish became a popular source of protein ; by 1870, "fish and chip shops" were springing up all over the country. For a hundred years, they were the classic popular restaurant, British style.Talk about sport in any language, and sooner or later you'll find yourself using English words. The British were the first people to write down standard rules for a lot of sports, even in sports like tennis which was invented by the French, or golf which was probably played in Holland, before becoming a national sport in Scotland.
    As the rules of lots of different sports spread all over the world, so did the language of sport. In the world of horse-racing, words like groom and lad and steeplechase spread to other countries; so too did the word "Derby". The word came to mean an important race, usually between horses. One of the most famous horse races in Ireland is called the Irish Sweeps Derby, and one of the most famous American races is called the Kentucky Derby.
     But where did this word come from? Why a "Derby"?

    Just like "Rugby", "Derby" (pronounced "Darby") is the name of a town in the middle of England; it is also the name of England's most famous horse race, The Derby. But the Derby is not run in the town of Derby, of course! That would be too simple !
the Derby
The Derby in modern times    Today the Derby has the reputation of being the world's most famous classic horse race. It is certainly the oldest and one of the biggest. Some years, over 600 horses are entered for the race; however only about 25 of them will actually take part in the great race on Derby day at the beginning of June.

        Legend has it that  the Derby was born during a dinner party in the year 1779, at the house of a nobleman, the Earl of Derby, near Epsom, a quiet village about 20 miles to the west of London. Like most aristocrats of the day, the earl loved horse-racing, and the open hilltops near his house were an excellent place for his jockeys to test their skills and speed against challengers. At the dinner party, the earl's friends decided to organise a big race for three-year old horses, and in respect for their host, they called it "the Derby".
     Very soon, the Derby became the most popular horse race of the year. People could easily drive out in their carriages from London to watch the big race. In 1788, the Prince of Wales came to watch the race for the first time, and by the year 1800  the Derby had become an important date in the annual social and sporting calendar.
    It didn't just interest aristocrats, of course. Though most racehorses at the time were owned by aristocratic families, horse-racing was a very popular sport with ordinary people too, as it still is today. In 1847, the House of Commons decided that it should not work on Derby Day. By doing so, it virtually made the day into a national holiday, as other people followed the parliamentary example.
    From then on, thousands of ordinary people from London would crowd onto the trains on Derby Day, to enjoy a day at the races, a bit of excitement, and a breath of fresh air.
   
    Death at the Derby
    The Derby has figured more than once in British history. The most dramatic event took place in 1913, when a woman called Emily Davison ran out in front of the King's horse, and tried to grab it. The horse and rider and Emily all fell to the ground in the confusion, and Emily was killed. Emily was a "Suffragette", a militant campaigning for women's votes. In those days, only men were allowed to vote in elections in Britain, and Emily belonged to a group fighting with determination for women's rights.
    Emily did not die completely in vain. Though the First World War delayed things by a few years, some women got the vote in 1921, and complete voting equality with men was achieved in 1928.The Derby was one of the first sporting events to be shown on television. In 1932, long before public TV broadcasts began, the race was shown on closed circuit television to a select audience in the Metropole Cinema, in London. Then, in 1946, it was one of the first sports events to be broadcast on BBC television.

    Today, the Derby is watched on TV by millions of people all over Britain, and in other countries too, thanks to satellite communications.
    While some people just watch it for the thrill of the race, a lot more watch it for the money. Betting (putting money) on horses is a very popular activity in Britain, and the Derby is the second biggest race of the year, in terms of money. It's impossible to know just how much money is bet on the Derby, but the figure is enormous. Betting starts months before the race actually takes place. Some people want to get in big bets on their personal favourites, before the odds are too low. Some professional gamblers bet sums of money greater than £10,000!
    For most people though, bets are more likely to be in the range of a pound or two. On Derby Day last year, it was estimated that a total of over £35 million was gambled on this single race!
Deep into that darkness peering,

Long I stood there, wondering, fearing,

Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortals

Ever dared to dream before;

But the silence was unbroken,

And the stillness gave no token,

And the only word there spoken

Was the whispered word, "Lenore!"

This I whispered, and an echo

Murmured back the word, "Lenore!"

Merely this, and nothing more.Not like the brazen giant of Greek fame,

With conquering limbs astride from land to land;

Here at our sea-washed, sunset gates shall stand

A mighty woman with a torch, whose flame

Is the imprisoned lightning, and her name

Mother of Exiles. From her beacon-hand

Glows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes command

The air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame.

“Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!” cries she

With silent lips. “Give me your tired, your poor,

Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,

The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.

Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,

I lift my lamp beside the golden door!”And all should cry, Beware! Beware!

His flashing eyes, his floating hair!

Weave a circle round him thrice,

And close your eyes with holy dread

For he on honey-dew hath fed,

And drunk the milk of Paradise.And all should cry, Beware! Beware!

His flashing eyes, his floating hair!

Weave a circle round him thrice,

And close your eyes with holy dread

For he on honey-dew hath fed,

And drunk the milk of Paradise.Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?

Thou art more lovely and more temperate:

Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May,

And summer’s lease hath all too short a date;

Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines,

And often is his gold complexion dimm'd;

And every fair from fair sometime declines,

By chance or nature’s changing course untrimm'd;

But thy eternal summer shall not fade,

Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow’st;

Nor shall death brag thou wander’st in his shade,

When in eternal lines to time thou grow’st:

  So long as men can breathe or eyes can see,

  So long lives this, and this gives life to thee.Turning and turning in the widening gyre   

The falcon cannot hear the falconer;

Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;

Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,

The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere   

The ceremony of innocence is drowned;

The best lack all conviction, while the worst   

Are full of passionate intensity.Willows whiten, aspens shiver.

The sunbeam showers break and quiver

In the stream that runneth ever

By the island in the river

Flowing down to Camelot.

Four gray walls, and four gray towers

Overlook a space of flowers,

And the silent isle imbowers

The Lady of Shalott.She walks in beauty, like the night

Of cloudless climes and starry skies;

And all that’s best of dark and bright

Meet in her aspect and her eyes;

Thus mellowed to that tender light

Which heaven to gaudy day denies.But O heart! heart! heart!

O the bleeding drops of red,

Where on the deck my Captain lies,

Fallen cold and dead.

O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells;

Rise up—for you the flag is flung—for you the bugle trills;

For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths—for you the shores a-crowding;

For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turningI have a rendezvous with Death

At some disputed barricade

When Spring comes back with rustling shade

And apple blossoms fill the air.

I have a rendezvous with Death

When Spring brings back blue days and fairby Emily Dickinson

I'm nobody! Who are you?

Are you nobody, too?

Then there's a pair of us — don't tell!

They'd banish us, you know.

How dreary to be somebody!

How public, like a frog

To tell your name the livelong day

To an admiring bog!by John Keats

Away! away! for I will fly to thee,

Not charioted by Bacchus and his pards,

But on the viewless wings of Poesy,

Though the dull brain perplexes and retards:

Already with thee! tender is the night,

And haply the Queen-Moon is on her throne,

Clustered around by all her starry Fays;

But here there is no light,

Save what from heaven is with the breezes blown

Through verdurous glooms and winding mossy waysApril is the cruellest month, breeding

Lilacs out of the dead land, mixing

Memory and desire, stirring

Dull roots with spring rain.

Winter kept us warm, covering

Earth in forgetful snow, feeding

A little life with dried tubers.But mostly he watched with eager search

The belfry tower of the Old North Church,

As it rose above the graves on the hill,

Lonely and spectral and sombre and still.

And lo! as he looks, on the belfry's height

A glimmer, and then a gleam of light!

He springs to the saddle, the bridle he turns,

But lingers and gazes, till full on his sight

A second lamp in the belfry burns.  Some say the world will end in fire,

Some say in ice.

From what I’ve tasted of desire

I hold with those who favor fire.

But if it had to perish twice,

I think I know enough of hate

To say that for destruction ice

Is also great

And would suffice.“My name is Ozymandias, king of kings:

Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!”

Nothing beside remains. Round the decay

Of that colossal wreck, boundless and bare

The lone and level sands stretch far away.If you can keep your head when all about you   

  Are losing theirs and blaming it on you,   

If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you,

  But make allowance for their doubting too;   

If you can wait and not be tired by waiting,

  Or being lied about, don’t deal in lies,

Or being hated, don’t give way to hating,

  And yet don’t look too good, nor talk too wise:

[...]

If you can fill the unforgiving minute

  With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,   

Yours is the Earth and everything that’s in it,   

  And—which is more—you’ll be a Man, my son!
We wear the mask that grins and lies,

It hides our cheeks and shades our eyes,—

This debt we pay to human guile;

With torn and bleeding hearts we smile,

And mouth with myriad subtleties.Does my haughtiness offend you?

Don't you take it awful hard

’Cause I laugh like I've got gold mines

Diggin’ in my own backyard.

You may shoot me with your words,

You may cut me with your eyes,

You may kill me with your hatefulness,

But still, like air, I’ll rise.’Twas brillig, and the slithy toves

     Did gyre and gimble in the wabe:

All mimsy were the borogoves,

     And the mome raths outgrabe.

“Beware the Jabberwock, my son!

     The jaws that bite, the claws that catch!

Beware the Jubjub bird, and shun

     The frumious Bandersnatch!” “i stand

on the sacrifices

of a million women before me

thinking

what can i do

to make this mountain taller

so the women after me

can see farther

- legacy”How do I love thee? Let me count the ways.

I love thee to the depth and breadth and height

My soul can reach, when feeling out of sight

For the ends of being and ideal grace.A kaleidoscopic mirage is born from the light

While words spoken in whispers calmly excite

Snowflakes of feathers are refreshing in July

A dragon is crowned visiting from Shanghai

Strawberries become mountains to explore

A room without doors I'm trying to ignore

From the corner the North Wind is blowing

Green marbles in a vase are brightly glowingThe mind swings inward on itself in fear

Swayed towards nausea from each normal sign.

Heredity of cruelty everywhere,

And everywhere the frocks of summer torn,

The long look back to see where choice is born,

As summer grass sways to the scythe's design. And I have learned too

to laugh with only my teeth

and shake hands without my heart.

I have also learned to say,’Goodbye’,

when I mean ‘Good-riddance’:

to say ‘Glad to meet you’,

without being glad; and to say ‘It’s been

nice talking to you’, after being bored.There are so many roots to the tree of anger   

that sometimes the branches shatter   

before they bear.

Sitting in Nedicks

the women rally before they march   

discussing the problematic girls   

they hire to make them free.

An almost white counterman passes   

a waiting brother to serve them first   

and the ladies neither notice nor reject   

the slighter pleasures of their slavery.   

But I who am bound by my mirror   

as well as my bed

see causes in colour

as well as sex

and sit here wondering   

which me will survive   

all these liberations.There is a place where the sidewalk ends

And before the street begins,

And there the grass grows soft and white,

And there the sun burns crimson bright,

And there the moon-bird rests from his flight

To cool in the peppermint wind.I placed a jar in Tennessee,   

And round it was, upon a hill.   

It made the slovenly wilderness   

Surround that hill.

The wilderness rose up to it,

And sprawled around, no longer wild.   

The jar was round upon the ground   

And tall and of a port in air.

It took dominion everywhere.   

The jar was gray and bare.

It did not give of bird or bush,   

Like nothing else in Tennessee.See, they return; ah, see the tentative

Movements, and the slow feet,          

The trouble in the pace and the uncertain      

Wavering!      

See, they return, one, and by one,     

With fear, as half-awakened; 

As if the snow should hesitate           

And murmur in the wind,      

  and half turn back;     

These were the "Wing'd-with-Awe,"         

  inviolable.       

Gods of the wingèd shoe!      

With them the silver hounds, 

  sniffing the trace of air!         

Haie! Haie!   

  These were the swift to harry;        

These the keen-scented;         

These were the souls of blood.          

Slow on the leash,      

  pallid the leash-men!I have a little shadow that goes in and out with me,

And what can be the use of him is more than I can see.

He is very, very like me from the heels up to the head;

And I see him jump before me, when I jump into my bed.No man is an island,

Entire of itself,

Every man is a piece of the continent,

A part of the main.

If a clod be washed away by the sea,

Europe is the less.

As well as if a promontory were.

As well as if a manor of thy friend’s

Or of thine own were:

Any man’s death diminishes me,

Because I am involved in mankind,

And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls;

It tolls for thee.It's not easy to know what is true for you or me

at twenty-two, my age. But I guess I'm what

I feel and see and hear, Harlem, I hear you:

hear you, hear me—we two—you, me, talk on this page.

(I hear New York, too.) Me—who?It's not easy to know what is true for you or me

at twenty-two, my age. But I guess I'm what

I feel and see and hear, Harlem, I hear you:

hear you, hear me—we two—you, me, talk on this page.

(I hear New York, too.) Me—who?The people upstairs all practise ballet

Their living room is a bowling alley

Their bedroom is full of conducted tours.

Their radio is louder than yours,

They celebrate week-ends all the week.

When they take a shower, your ceilings leak.

They try to get their parties to mix

By supplying their guests with Pogo sticks,

And when their fun at last abates,

They go to the bathroom on roller skates.

I might love the people upstairs more

If only they lived on another floor. wade
through black jade.
       Of the crow-blue mussel-shells, one keeps
       adjusting the ash-heaps;
              opening and shutting itself like

an
injured fan.
       The barnacles which encrust the side
       of the wave, cannot hide
              there for the submerged shafts of the

sun,
split like spun
       glass, move themselves with spotlight swiftness
       into the crevices—
              in and out, illuminating

the
turquoise sea
       of bodies. The water drives a wedge
       of iron through the iron edge
              of the cliff; whereupon the stars,

pink
rice-grains, ink-
       bespattered jelly fish, crabs like green
       lilies, and submarine
              toadstools, slide each on the other.