Spanish Flu Pandemic of 1918
The deadliest virus in modern history, perhaps of all time, was the 1918 Spanish Flu. It killed about 20 to 50 million people worldwide, perhaps more. The total death toll is unknown because medical records were not kept in many areas.

The pandemic hit during World War I and devastated military troops. In the United States, for instance, more servicemen were killed from the flu than from the war itself. The Spanish flu was fatal to a higher proportion of young adults than most flu viruses.

The pandemic started mildly, in the spring of 1918, but was followed by a much more severe wave in the fall of 1918. The war likely contributed to the devastating mortality numbers, as large outbreaks occurred in military forces living in close quarters. Poor nutrition and the unsanitary conditions of war camps had an effect.

A third wave occurred in the winter and spring of 1919, and a fourth, smaller wave occurred in a few areas in spring 1920. Initial symptoms of the flu were typical: sore throat, headache, and fever. The flu often progressed rapidly to cause severe pneumonia and sometimes hemorrhage in the lungs and mucus membranes. A characteristic feature of severe cases of the Spanish Flu was heliotrope cyanosis, where the patient’s face turned blue from lack of oxygen in the cells. Death usually followed within hours or days.

Modern medicine such as vaccines, antivirals, and antibiotics for secondary infections were not available at that time, so medical personnel couldn’t do much more than try to relieve symptoms.

The flu ended when it had infected enough people that those who were susceptible had either died or developed immunity.

The Environment
In our modern world, there are many factors that place the wellbeing of the planet in jeopardy. While some people have the opinion that environmental problems are just a natural occurrence, others believe that human beings have a huge impact on the environment. Regardless of your viewpoint, take into consideration the following factors that place our environment as well as the planet Earth in danger.

Global warming or climate change is a major contributing factor to environmental damage. Because of global warming, we have seen an increase in melting ice caps, a rise in sea levels, and the formation of new weather patterns. These weather patterns have caused stronger storms, droughts, and flooding in places that they formerly did not occur.

Air pollution is primarily caused as a result of excessive and unregulated emissions of carbon dioxide into the air. Pollutants mostly emerge from the burning of fossil fuels in addition to chemicals, toxic substances, and improper waste disposal. Air pollutants are absorbed into the atmosphere, and they can cause smog, a combination of smoke and fog, in valleys as well as produce acidic precipitation in areas far away from the pollution source.

In many areas, people and local governments do not sustainably use their natural resources. Mining for natural gases, deforestation, and even improper use of water resources can have tremendous effects on the environment. While these strategies often attempt to boost local economies, their effects can lead to oil spills, interrupted animal habitats, and droughts.

Ultimately, the effects of the modern world on the environment can lead to many problems. Human beings need to consider the repercussions of their actions, trying to reduce, reuse, and recycle materials while establishing environmentally sustainable habits. If measures are not taken to protect the environment, we can potentially witness the extinction of more endangered species, worldwide pollution, and a completely uninhabitable planet.
Human body parts and organs
It goes without saying that humans (mammals identifiable as those that stand upright and are comparatively advanced and capable of detailed thought) have pretty remarkable bodies, given all that they've accomplished. (Furthermore, an especially intelligent human brain produced this text!) To be sure, humans have overcome predators, disease, and all sorts of other obstacles over thousands of years.

To fully understand and appreciate these accomplishments, let's take at some of the most well-known parts of the human body!

The head, or the spherical body part that contains the brain and rests at the top of the human body, has quite a few individual organs and body parts on it. (It should quickly be mentioned that hair occupies the space on top of the head, and the ears, the organs responsible for hearing, are located on either side of the head.) From top to bottom, the eyebrows, or horizontal strips of hair that can be found above the eye, are the first components of the head. The eyes are below them, and are round, orb-like organs that allow humans to see.

The eyes make way for the nose, or an external (sticking-out) organ that plays an important part in the breathing and bacteria-elimination processes. Below that is the mouth, or a wide, cavernous organ that chews food, removes bacteria, helps with breathing, and more. The mouth contains teeth, or small, white-colored, pointed body parts used to chew food, and the tongue, or a red-colored, boneless organ used to chew food and speak.

The neck is the long body part that connects the head to the chest (the muscular body part that protects the heart and lungs), and the stomach, or the part of the body that contains food and liquid-processing organs, comes below that.

The legs are the long, muscular body parts that allow humans to move from one spot to another and perform a variety of actions. Each leg contains a thigh (a thick, especially muscular body part used to perform strenuous motions; the upper part of the leg) and a calf (thinner, more flexible body part that absorbs the shock associated with movement; the lower part of the leg). Feet can be found at the bottom of legs, and each foot is comprised of five toes, or small appendages that help balance.

Arms are long, powerful body parts that are located on either side of chest, below the shoulders;arms are comprised of biceps (the thicker, more powerful upper portion), and forearms (the thinner, more flexible lower portion). Hands, or small, gripping body parts used for a tremendous number of actions, are at the end of arms. Each hand contains five fingers, or small appendages used to grip objects.

The aforementioned shoulders are rounded body parts that aid arms' flexibility. One's back is found on the opposite side of the stomach, and is a flat section of the body that contains important muscles that're intended to protect the lungs and other internal organs, in addition to helping humans perform certain motions and actions.

Yellowstone National Park
Yellowstone National Park, located in Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming, was established as the first national park in the United States. The park is a popular destination for visitors who enjoy ecological tourism as it offers forests, mountains, and abundant ecosystems to explore. Some of Yellowstone’s most well-known landmarks are its geothermal hot springs and geysers, the most famous of which is named Old Faithful.

Last fall, Lisa and her friends decided to take a camping trip to Yellowstone National Park. They arranged to stay at one of the park’s many convenient campsites. For their camping trip, they brought their backpacks, sleeping bags, and a cooler of food and drinks. They pitched their tents immediately upon arriving to their campsite.

During their trip, Lisa and her friends hiked the many trails of the park, exploring its natural surroundings. In the forest, they saw a lot of local wildlife. Lisa was surprised to see a family of grizzly bears, some gray wolves, and even bald eagles flying overhead. Outside of the woods, they admired the beauty of some of Yellowstone’s natural cascades.

Since Yellowstone contains many hot springs and the world’s largest area of active geysers, Lisa and her friends visited many different geyser sites. They even spent an afternoon swimming in Yellowstone’s Boiling River. Of all of the sites, Lisa and her friends agreed that Old Faithful was the most impressive. Lisa and her friends waited patiently for the geyser to erupt. After about 40 minutes, a stream of boiling water over 100 feet tall sprayed from the ground and up into the air. Fortunately, no one got wet!
On the night of April 4th 1968, someone was waiting opposite the windows of the Lorraine Motel, in downtown Memphis.
    In front of the motel, a big white Cadillac was parked; it was the car in which the Rev. Martin Luther King was being driven round, as he traveled through the southern states, speaking to audiences in towns and cities, promoting the cause of non-violence and civil rights.
    When King stepped out onto the balcony, to take a breath of fresh air after eating his dinner, a shot rang out. The civil rights leader and Nobel-prizewinner, the man who preached non-violence, fell to the ground, fatally wounded. Within minutes, he was dead.
    The news spread like wildfire round the USA; the man who had done more, perhaps, than any other to further the rights of Black people in the United States of America, had been assassinated, it seemed, by a lone sniper, a white extremist. Weeks later a man by the name of James Earl Ray was arrested and sentenced to 99 years in prison for the assassination. But is that really what happened?
    Though James Earl Ray initially confessed to killing King, it was not long before he retracted his statement; and to this day, there are those who do not believe that Ray was actually guilty of the crime for which he spent almost 30 years behind bars.
    Indeed, even Dexter King, Martin Luther King's son, believed that Ray was not his father's assassin.
    But if Ray did not do the deed, who did? And why? Was it just a pure racist crime? Or was this a political assassination ordered by some faceless figures in some secret service? The theory that King was really assassinated by the Secret Service has been growing more and more popular over recent years, and was even the subject of an "X-Files" episode. So how real is the conspiracy theory? And what reasons might anyone other than a racist have had to get rid of a charismatic and peaceful leader like Martin Luther King?
The Lorraine MotelThe Lorraine Motel, with the balcony on which King was assassinated and a 60s Cadillac like the one in which King was traveling     We have to take ourselves back to 1968. Since 1955, King had been at the front of the Civil Rights movement in the USA. He had given great support to the year-long bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama, which eventually led to the desegregation of public transportation; he had used his skills as a passionate orator to inspire black people to stand up for their rights, in housing, education and other civil rights; and he had gained the backing of a growing number of whites. He was in the front line of the anti-segregation demonstrations in Birmingham, Alabama, in 1963, which probably did more than any other protest to further the cause of civil rights.
    During his brief presidency from 1960 to 1963, Kennedy paved the way for a Civil Rights Act, which would officially ban race-based segregation throughout the USA. Though Kennedy was gunned down before he had time to put the act through Congress, Lyndon Johnson completed the job, and by the end of 1964, the Civil Rights Act was law, and Martin Luther King had won the Nobel Prize for Peace.
    Racism, however, had not disappeared. More laws, including the 1968 Civil Rights Act, were needed to fully eradicate all forms of official racism. But even then, laws could not change the deep-seated bigotry of many southern whites; the more Civil Rights laws were passed, the more some racist groups felt threatened.
    1968 was a crisis year in many countries. The Civil Rights movement in the USA had more or less merged with the anti-Vietnam War movement. Black leaders like King were being joined by the pacifist gurus of a new generation of educated young white Americans, Bob Dylan and Joan Baez. At the same time, in the black ghettoes of the rustbelt cities, a new and more aggressive movement had emerged: Black Power.
    In the opinion of some observers, America was slowly sliding towards civil unrest on a large scale. Though King, with his non-violence, was no supporter of civil conflict, he was the no.1 figurehead of black America. Hence the conspiracy theory.
    According to the theory, King was assassinated by the government (whoever that may have been) to prevent the USA from severe civil conflict. A week before King was assassinated, a peaceful march in Memphis had been provoked into violence by a gang called "the Invaders". Nobody knows who was behind the Invaders - but someone was.
    James Earl Ray admitted that he was involved in the assassination of King, but claimed that he was part of a plot, the dumb guy who was used by others who tricked him into it. He claimed that the gun that killed King was actually fired by a man called "Raoul" - but who Raoul was no one knows. Dexter King, who studied events surrounding his father's death in the minutest detail, believed that Ray was telling the truth.
   New scientific tests suggest that it was not Ray's gun that fired the bullet that killed King.
    So if it was "Raoul", not Ray, that really assassinated Martin Luther King, why did he do it, and on whose orders? Was it the CIA, or some other secret organization, nervous about rising black militantism and opposition to the Vietnam war? Or was King's assassination masterminded by some secret white supremacist organisation?
    Maybe we will know one day, maybe not.
On June 19th 1953, Julius and Ethel Rosenberg died in the electric chair at Sing Sing Prison, New York. Their death marked the end of the most notorious political affair in America in the nineteen fifties, and came over two years after their sentencing for the crime of spying for the Soviet Union. 

It came in spite of some 21,000 petitions and telegrams to the White House, demanding clemency, from people, organisations and governments in North America and Europe, including Albert Einstein. It was, in a way, the climax of McCarthyism. 

At the time the American press, full of a manic fear and hatred of communists and anything that could be considered "leftist" fully supported the verdict. Only one major paper, the National Guardian, saw anything wrong in the trial, anything excessive in the verdict. The Rosenbergs were sentenced principally on the word of Ethel Rosenberg's brother David, an employee at the Atomic Research Center at Los Alamos, who admitted having handed the Russians plans of US atomic weapons; he accused Julius Rosenberg of having recruited him. 

But what was all the hassle about ? David's A-bomb plans, handed to the Russians, were no more than "a poor caricature", in the words of the bomb's inventor, "A drawing unable to give any worthwhile information". Some other accusations were proved to be false, too, and throughout the trial, the Rosenbergs themselves maintained their innocence. By normal standards of justice, there was little in the affair that could justify a sentence of death. 

However, there was one point. The Rosenbergs were Communists, and proud of it. In the age of McCarthyism, that in itself was a heinous crime, in the eyes of a nation encouraged to believe that Communism was worse than devil-worship. After the departure of Senator McCarthy from public life (following his accusations that many of America's leading politicians were secretly communists or sympathisers), McCarthyism died away and the Rosenberg affair came to represent the nation's guilty conscience — the case of two people who were unjustly put to death. 

Chicago skyscraper
Senator Joseph McCarthy
Thirty years later, two American historians published a book on the Rosenberg Affair, and after much research, Ronald Radosh and Joyce Milton concluded that Julius Rosenberg in fact was guilty of spying, though there was no proof of anything in Ethel's case; Ethel's only mistake was to have loved her husband, and to have sympathized with his views, neither of which is a crime, let alone a crime punishable by the death sentence in a country where freedom of speech and opinion are guaranteed by the Constitution.

 Radosh's research allowed him to ascertain that Julius was indeed the head of a Russian spy ring, that he did hand over secrets to the Russians, and that these did allow the Soviets to save three years on their nuclear research program. But, he concluded "That being said, he did not legally deserve the electric chair, but thirty years in jail. For her part, she was executed for nothing". 

Peering more deeply into the character of Julius Rosenberg, the historians portrayed him as a devoted communist, ready to sacrifice himself, his wife and his family in the name of the principles he so strongly believed in. He believed, furthermore, that Ethel would never be killed, and that one day the United States would become a socialist state.... a fear that is still brandished to this day in the dystrumpian rhetoric of some on the right.

The legacy of McCarthyism
ENGLISH GRAMMAR for all
E-book, hardback, paperback
The user-friendly reference grammar recommended by English teaching magazines worldwide
IATEFL Voices, EFL Magazine, Open! magazine, English Australia... and more
As for McCarthyism, following the death of Senator McCarthy the movement rapidly declined in popularity and indeed in credibility, and by the sixties the period was looked back on by many Americans with embarrassment, an age of witch-hunts against mostly innocent people..By the nineteen nineties, and the demise of the Soviet Union, the communist threat was completely forgotten by all in America other than some die-hards on the far right, who continued to see  "Reds under the bed" in the most unlikely of situations. Fear of communism was dropped from mainstream politics in the USA, being replaced by a fear of socialism that is portrayed by American conservatives as representing the antithesis of American values. Thus in the runup to the 2020 presidential elections, the popular candidate for the Democratic party nomination, Bernie Sanders, lost out to Joe Biden in part because Sanders was repeatedy branded as a socialist..... with Donald Trump going one step further, telling Fox News "“I think he’s a communist. I mean, you know, look, I think of communism when I think of Bernie.” 

McCarthyism may have died out with the McCarthy generation.... but its DNA is still present on the fringes of American political life seventy years after the Rosenbergs went to the electric chair.
  Electric vehicles have arrived. With technology led by Tesla, and all of the world's major car manufacturers following along behind, electric vehicles are now a common sight on the roads of most developed countries.  Yet the situation in less developed countries is rather different;  the only African country to have started the change to electric vehicles is South Africa and even there, electric vehicle sales still account for less than 1% of the total. In South America, the situation is better, with all Latin American countries beginning the move towards electric vehicles, particularly Columbia which, in 2020, had a third of the continent's total electric car fleet.. In Russia, the wealthy were investing in imported electric cars until the invasion of Ukraine stopped most imports; a very small number of electric vehicles are manufactured locally. In India the government is promoting the purchase of electric vehicles with tax exemptions and other incentives. So electric cars have arrived, and their share of the market is increasing almost  worldwide.
Discover America 
 its past, its present, its future.
CLICK FOR DETAILS
  Does this mean, therefore, that the world is on track to phase out the use of petrol-driven vehicles in less than thirty years? And does it mean that electric vehicles are the sustainable solution to our transport needs for the second half of the century? Unfortunately, to the disappointment of some people, the answer to both of these questions has to be "no".
  The massive development of electric vehicles can only be possible if two conditions are met. Firstly the expansion of electric vehicle manufacturing is dependent on the fragile ability of manufacturers to source vastly increased quantities of  vital components and elements without which electric vehicles cannot operate; these include lithium, cobalt and "rare earths" such as neodymium and tantalum, as well as silicon chips which have already been in short supply since 2020.  Secondly, few countries currently have electricity grids that are anywhere near being able to cope with the huge increase in demand for electricity that will accompany any rapid growth in electric vehicle ownership.  Without adequate supplies of all the vital ingredients of electric motors and batteries, or without power supplies that are able to provide the electricity required to recharge millions of electric batteries every day (as well as supplying the current we need for everything else, such as lighting, heating, trains and electric devices), the electric car revolution will run up against insoluble problems in all but the molst developed countries.

   Governments and vehicle manufacturers are fully aware of these issues, but the consensus among policy-makers seems to be that somehow technology will come up with the answers, as it often has in the past. Analysts also predict that changing social attitudes and environmental awareness will lead to a reduction in private vehicle use and a fall in the numbers of vehicles on the roads. This prediction is likely to be right, though not necessarily for those reasons alone; any shortage of  essential components will force up the cost of electric vehicles, and any shortage of battery recharging facilities or capacity will discourage people from buying electric vehicles, leading to a fall in the number of vehicles on the roads.
 Ultimately the success of the transition to electric powered vehicles will depend on advances in technology in three fields; the weight of batteries, the amount of power that they can produce, and the speed at which they can be recharged... or exchanged.
  It may surprise you to learn that electric vehicles are not a new idea; indeed, at the start of the automobile age in the late 19th century, America had as many electric cars as gas-driven cars, and New York's biggest taxi company used electric vehicles. In order to keep their taxis on the road when the batteries ran low, they set up battery points at strategic locations where instead of recharging their batteries, drivers would just exchange them for fully recharged ones, a process that took no longer than refilling with gasolene.
  Thus battery exchange stations, rather than battery recharging points, may perhaps solve the problem of slow recharging times which currently prevents owners taking their electric vehicles on long trips. Yet battery exchange is not an option with today's large heavy batteries. While the latest generation of Lithium-ion batteries are almost twice as efficient as the batteries being used just five years ago, they remain big and heavy.  Before batteries can become easy to exchange, a quantum leap in battery technology is needed, one which will allow batteries to store much larger amounts of electricity in much smaller and lighter units. Teams of top electrical engineers  in universities and private laboratories worldwide are working on battery technology, and progress has been rapid.... New types of lithium batteries are being developed, but the radical discovery that will revolutionise battery design is still to be made.
  As for the availability of clean renewable electricity in sufficient quantities to cope with demand from all the world's electric vehicles, progress in this direction is already underway. Ideally, notably in hot countries and outside cities, recharging points will be autonomous, generating their own electricity from solar panels and wind or water turbines and storing it either mechanically or in high-powered batteries. The technology already exists, and a California company, Beam Global, recently installed 30 solar-powered recharging stations in sunny parts of the state.
  So are people who believe in the ability of technology to solve all our problems being realistic, or over-optimistic? And will other problems such as environmental issues and the availability of vital materials throw a spanner in the works? Will all the world's countries be able to complete the electric vehicle revolution, or will the world's poorer nations get left behind.... yet again? For the time being, progress is upwards, but can it continue? In terms of volume, the electric vehicle revolution has only just got underway..
This five-letter word is one that Californians see almost daily in headlines.
    How to dam it, how to sell it, how to use it, how to share it, how to keep it pure.... these are just a few of the major problems that face California's people and political leaders.
    Thousands of dollars are spent annually on studies, and on lawsuits, in California's "Water Wars", and the seemingly endless conflict between the overwhelming needs of Central and Southern California, and their drain on Northern California rivers.
    California has what has been called "the biggest waterworks in history". Dams in the Sierra Nevada mountains hold back water provided by great rivers fed by rain and snowmelt; they tame raging rivers, help prevent damaging floods, generate cheap, pollution-free hydro-electricity, and release a steady supply of water for California's citizens.
    California's great cities get their water via an immense network of dams, aqueducts, pipelines and wells that is one of the engineering wonders of the world. Part of the water supply for the Los Angeles area comes from a 445-mile long canal (photo top of page) running south from the "Delta" area of Northern California. During its long journey, the water is pumped up a 3000 ft. elevation, then enters a tunnel through the mountains, before reaching the Los Angeles area. More water for this thirsty area is brought in along the Colorado River Aqueduct, over a distance of 185 miles; and the City of Los Angeles also takes water from a place called Owens Valley, 338 miles away!
    Even the city of San Francisco, in cooler Northern California, has long-distance water, its supply being carried almost 150 miles from an artificial lake in Yosemite National Park.
    Yet mammoth as this interlocking system is,  it is inadequate to handle the state's rapidly growing population. The prospect of major water problems in the near future has become particularly alarming.
   Many California farmers have already had to abandon crops on account of water shortages during recent dry summers; and in many towns and cities, the sprinklers that traditionally keep the lawns green round suburban homes have been turned off.    .

    As if dry summers and growing needs were not enough problems already, Californians also have problems getting water from outside their state. For instance, the Colorado river.provides water to several states, and also to Indian reservations, and there has been a lot of argument about water rights. In 2003, the state of California agreed to take a smaller quota of water from the Colorado River - partly to allow the state of Nevada to have more, on account of the dramatic increase in needs of the city of Las Vegas.

    One of the most serious environmental problems was that of Mono Lake. In 1989, California's State Legislature voted $65 million to find alternatives to save Mono Lake from evaporating in the desert sun of Eastern California. Since then, the depletion of this unique environmentally-sensitive lake has been reversed, and though the water level today is still some 35 ft.  below the natural level recorded back in 1941, it is now 10 feet higher than it was at its lowest point, in 1982.

    Since the year 2000, California has had a series of drought years with below normal rainfall. Emergency water conservation ordinances have made lawns turn brown, cars and sidewalks get dirty. Violators of the ordinances have had their water supply cut to a trickle. In Fresno, a city which does not even meter how much water its residents use, the wells have already run dry..
EXCEPTIONAL !
A reference grammar  described as "a welcome treat"  by the flagship  IATEFL Voices Magazine,
Click to find out why
    Water conservation measures are part of the answer; but political analysts predict that it will require many years and some serious and unattractive lifestyle changes to resolve California's Water Wars. The tense competition for a scarce resource, among groups with conflicting interests, will demand give and take forever.
Mention the word "globalization", and you are likely to get a reaction.
    Globalization, the creation of a new world economic system dominated by huge corporations and the "G8" nations, is an idea that has its fervent supporters and its bitter opponents.
        For its opponents, globalization is seen as a system designed to impose the American economic model on the whole world, for the sole benefit of the USA and a few other rich countries. For its supporters, globalization is the way forward to a better world, where everyone will ultimately be better off than they are today.
    Globalization is a process about which both supporters and opponents can justify some of their arguments. Yet in spite of the hopes of many of its critics, there is one thing about which there can no longer be any doubt. "Globalization" is not a future development that we can accept or reject; it is a process that has already largely taken place; and it is one from which - in all but the most catastrophic future scenarios - there can be no going back
    The other day in Paris, I attended an international symposium on globalization that brought together politicians and economists, diplomats, academics, trade unionists and representatives of humanitarian agencies; there were speakers from Africa, Asia, Europe and the Americas, including Umberto Eco, former French foreign minister Bernard Kouchner, and Harvard economist Jeffrey Sachs. Each had his or her own specific views, but there was one thing on which every speaker agreed; the fact that globalization is here to stay.
    As French trade union leader Nicole Notat put it, "The market economy is certainly the best system that exists."
In many ways, there is nothing new about globalization; it is a process that began to spread some three hundred years ago, when European nations, and Britain in particular, developed an economic system that depended on international trade. Spices, sugar, tea and coffee were among the first commodities that were traded globally. By 1850, Britain - the most developed nation at the time - had an economy that was dependent for its survival on global trade. Unable to feed its growing population, the country was importing 25% of its basic food, most of it from America and the British empire; and even if Britain was at the time far ahead of other nations in the "globalization" of its economy, other countries such as France and the United States were already moving strongly in the same direction.
    Without the globalization of trade, no nation would have been able to achieve its current state of development; for no nation in the world, not even the USA, can supply all its own needs in raw materials, products, or services.
    Over the last two centuries, thanks to this process, living standards have increased dramatically in most parts of the world. Yet this huge improvement has not benefited every nation equally, and there are indeed some parts of the world where living standards have actually declined. In 1820, the difference in wealth between the people in the world's poorest nations and those in the world's richest nations was about 3:1. Today it is about 30:1.
    It is this flagrant inequality resulting from globalization, that is unacceptable to so many people.
    Nonetheless, it would be quite wrong to suggest that globalization only benefits the nations of the world that are already rich. In the last fifty years, a whole group of nations, including China and India, the world's two most populated states, have benefited massively from the advantages of globalization. Not to mention oil-rich states like the Emirates or Dubai.  In the 1990's, eighteen out of twenty of the fastest growing economies in the world were in the developing world; only two were "western" countries. In the 1990s the Chinese economy, thanks to a huge development of international trade, grew by a massive average of 10.7% per year, bringing jobs and a sharp rise in living standards to millions of people. Without globalization, where would they be?
    By contrast, over the same period the economy of Switzerland, one of the world's richest nations, grew by just 0.6% per year.
In the end therefore, the question is not "To globalize or not to globalize?" It is a matter of finding ways to make sure that the riches of tomorrow's global economy are spread more equitably across the world.
    It is not going to be easy. For instance there is a large degree of popular consensus in developed countries that the "Third World Debt", the vicious circle of poverty that condemns some of the world's poorest countries to remain poor, is an injustice that must be set right; yet even though the first steps in this direction have already been taken, there is still a lot more to be done.
    Today, about 25% of the world's population live in countries that are benefiting very little, or not at all, from the effects of globalization - countries like Chad or Myanmar, countries that are often hard to reach and even harder to live in. Until recently, these countries were largely left to their own devices, left to sink further into poverty. One man who understood this well was Bin Laden, who though coming personally from a rich family that had benefited massively from globalization, recruited his Taliban and Al Qaida fighters from the ranks of those who had been left out; Afghans, poor Pakistanis, Chechens, even Burmese.
    Paradoxically - both for himself and for the developed world - Bin Laden's terror campaign may prove to be the event that reinforces globalization rather than destroying it – notably because of the dramatic way in which it has highlighted the dangers of the growing gap between rich nations and poor ones. There is only one feasible way of addressing this problem, and that is to involve the world's poorer countries more closely in the growing economy. It will have to happen, because the consequences of failure in this matter will benefit no country.
    Bin Laden wanted to destroy America, and with it the global economy; yet were the global economy to collapse, it would not be the world's richest nations that suffer most. It would be the world's poorer and poorest nations. That is no doubt the most compelling general argument in favour of continuing globalization.
    The most compelling argument against globalization, in its current form, concerns the nature of the economic forces that are at work. Of the 100 largest players in today's world economy, 49 are nations, but 51 are multinational corporations, unelected bodies whose interests can sometimes be very different from those of the people of countries in which they operate.
    The task that now faces world leaders is finding the best way to control future developments, for the greatest benefit of the greatest number of people; it is also - perhaps more importantly - to do so in an environmentally sustainable way. 

    Tomorrow's world economy will be continue to be global; but it must be green too . These two targets are not incompatible with each other; quite the reverse, they are intimately connected.
 The world's population is expected to continue growing until the end of the twenty-first century; that at least was the general consensus of experts until 2019. Maybe in the new post-Covid reality, the rate of growth will slow; but even so, unless Covid-19 or some other new virus causes millions more deaths than initially predicted, the world's population will continue to grow, putting ever-increasing pressure on the natural environment, on resources, on living space, and most critically on food and water. Aeroponics will be part of the solution.

     According to a United Nations FAO report published in 2011, almost half of the fruit and vegetables produced in the world go to waste – they never get consumed by the humans for whom they are grown.
   Wastage occurs throughout the production and distribution cycle,  during production, during transformation, during transport, and even – notably in developed economies – after purchase by the final customer.
    Fifty percent of all fruit and vegetables going to waste, that is an enormous amount of wastage,  and not just in economic terms.  This wastage has a huge impact in terms of natural resources, particularly space and water, which in turn have huge implications for the global environment.
    Cutting out all waste in the production and distribution of food is an impossible goal. Even people living in small eco-sustainable communities generate waste. Even in organic crop production, pests and disease cause wastage; and even if harvested and distributed locally, part of a crop will always be wasted.
    But there is a large difference between wasting fifty percent of all fruit and vegetables produced worldwide, and the unreachable goal of achieving no waste at all. Between 50% and zero, there is plenty of scope for significantly reducing the volume of food waste worldwide simply through the use of new more efficient production methods.
    Studies have shown that packaging and distribution systems  account for about 25% of total wastage of fresh fruit and vegetables, leaving plenty of opportunity for improvement. In an ideal world, and as in the past, much of the food consumed in cities would be produced locally, not shipped thousands of miles as happens today.
    In 1998, the US Department of Agriculture released a study into fruit and vegetables arriving at the Chicago Terminal Market, the main point of distribution for the American Middle West. The report showed that basic vegetables including lettuce, broccoli, peas or  cauliflowers all traveled over 2000 miles (over 3000 km) before reaching the market... and before being shipped on to supermarkets across the region. Yet Chicago is in the heart of a massive agricultural area. Granted it can get pretty cold in winter, but with modern agricultural techniques, the Midwest could be self-sufficient for many types of fruit and vegetables, cutting out the massive environmental cost of shipping tons of vegetables half way across a continent.
    Since 2011, Chicago's O'Hare airport has been home to an aeroponic garden (photo top of page) , where people can see how vegetables can be grown in an environment that is not only without soil but even without any permanent medium in which to grow. In this experimental  garden, plants are grown, as the name suggests, ... in the air, their roots hanging down in nothing.
    Hydroponics, growing plants in troughs of nutrient-rich water, has been developing since the 1970's. Aeroponics takes things one step further, by removing the water and replacing it with air. Not just air, obviously; while plants are grown with roots hanging in the air, these roots are regularly sprayed with a nutrient-rich solution that gives them just what they need for optimum growth. It's very high-tech, it's not cheap, and it's a long way from currently popular organic farming techniques. Yet in many ways, aeroponics is actually more environment-friendly than even the most strictly managed traditional organic farming methods. And it's down to one factor: waste.
    Traditional farming is wasteful; modern intensive agriculture relies on large inputs of external resources, notably heat, water and nutrients. The vast amounts of water used by agriculture are already causing serious problems in many parts of the world; beneath California's San Joaquim Valley, the world's most productive agricultural area, water tables have been dropping for almost a century, and scientists estimate that the land... not the water table below it... has sunk by over 8 metres in some parts. NASA calculate that Southern California had a "water deficit" of 4.2 gigatons per year from 2002 to 2015.
    Aeroponic agriculture reduces water waste to zero. The only water used is what is actually taken up by the roots of plants when they are sprayed. Any water not used can be collected and reused.
    The same goes for nutrients; in traditional agriculture, plants only extract a small proportion of nutrients from the ground, and good ground will have many nutrients in it that will not be used at all by the crops grown on it. In an age of diminishing natural resources, traditional agriculture uses millions of tons of chemical fertilizer each year, much of which goes to waste. In Brittany, France, many streams and beaches have been seriously polluted by nutrient-rich water running off fields, causing "algal bloom" along the seashore and covering some beaches in green slime. With aeroponic agriculture, no nutrients are lost, so there is no risk of unintended pollution.
    One big advantage of traditional agriculture is that it almost always uses natural heat and light, even if under glass or plastic. Aeroponic agriculture, by contrast, may require artificial heat and light, specially if practised indoors. But with the development of small-scale locally-sited renewable energy production, and highly energy-efficient buildings and lighting systems, large-scale indoor aeroponic vegetable growing units are liable to be a feature of tomorrow's cities.
    If all the lettuces consumed in Chicago in winter could be grown locally, in carbon-neutral zero-waste aeroponic "farms", instead of being brought in by truck from California, that in itself would lead to a huge reduction in the use of water, minerals, land-space and transportation costs.  Reproduced on a global scale, reduced use of natural resources will be vital for ensuring a sustainable future for generations to come, even when the global population goes above 10 billion.
Very few people alive in Britain today remember the time when Britain last had a king. Elizabeth II was Queen of England for 70 years, from 1952 to 2022, so only the very oldest people remember the last king, her father George VI.
    Queen Elizabeth has marked life and times in Britain for the past seven decades, and since her death, Britain has entered a new period of history. The Second Elizabethan age is over.
   For millions of people in Britain, and in other countries too, the death of the Queen has been like losing a  grandmother, since the Queen was part of national life, part of the national family, and a very popular figure. Opinion polls in 2020 showed that over 80% of people in Britain appreciated the Queen.
    There has been a moment of national trauma following her death; the Queen was not just "a royal", she was the Queen,  a person whose image people see every day, and will continue to see for some time, on coins, on banknotes, on stamps, in magazines, in public places. While Charles is not unpopular, he is less appreciated than his mother the Queen, and less popular than his son Prince William.  
  Charles was born in 1948,  and has spent his life in the shadow of the Queen. He has the image of a gentleman farmer, and is still actively involved in the agricultural life of his estates. Like his father, the Duke of Edinburgh, who was president of the WWF, Charles is very concerned about the environment and the natural world, and his farms are known for their organic produce. Indeed, Charles's farms became organic in 1985, long before the organic boom of recent years, and  "Duchy Organic", set up by Charles, is one of the biggest brands of organic foods in the UK, sold in the Waitrose supermarkets.
Prince William and Kate
William has now become the new Prince of Wales - the historic title of the heir to the throne
  Charles has also spent a lot of time trying to help underprivileged youth in Britain's inner cities. His "Prince's Trust" is a charity that has helped thousands of kids from poor parts of Britain's cities to get good training and good jobs. He has also been active on the world stage, and in 2020 he encouraged world leaders at the Davos summit "to reset capitalism", in order to prevent the worst effects of climate change. As a prince, he could say and do what he wanted; as Head of State, he will have to be more neutral.  That may be difficult for him.
    How long will Charles be king? Not as long as his mother, that is sure. He came to the throne at the age of 73, an age when most people are thinking more about retirement than taking up a big and important job. If he lives as long as his mother, he will remain king for over 20 years, longer than most heads of state..
   If he is a good king, then one day he will probably be succeeded by his elder son William. Few people  want Britain to become a republic. A poll in 2012 showed that 80% of people in Britain wanted the monarchy to continue, with only 13% wanting a republic. Perhaps this is understandable; in Britain, as in many other countries, politicians are not particularly popular these days! God save the King !